Guide: intro to masking (#39490)
mdn/content: files/en-us/web/css/css_masking/masking/index.md

---
title: Introduction to masking

> slug: Web/CSS/CSS_masking/masking

Author: there's clipping in the masking module, so Intro doesn't work

> slug: Web/CSS/CSS_masking/masking

Reviewer: ok, fair enough

page-type: guide

> ---

Author: > This is going to be a series of guides. They will be added to the module landing page and the yaml file when complete (don't want any guide to hold up the others, and there are too many files being edited in this project to make it one PR).

> ---

Author: Added!

}
.mask-source {
  background: url(https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/colorful-heart.png);
  background-size: 220px 220px;
}
```

Note how the transparent mask areas crop the element; the only parts of the element that are visible are the areas where the mask is opaque. The color of the mask itself doesn't matter.

{{EmbedLiveSample("image1", "", "250px")}}

## Alpha transparency versus luminance

We can force the colors of the mask to matter with the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property. Here we change the `mask-mode` to from the default of `match-source`, which sets the `mask-mode` either `alpha` or `luminance` depending on the mask type, and, in the case of SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements, `<mask>` element's actual {{cssxref("mask-type")}}. The mask mode defaults to `alpha` for all masks unless the mask source is an SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} element, in which case the `mask-type`, unless explicitly set with the CSS {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property or the SVG {{svgattr("mask-type")}} attribute, defaults to `luminance`, so the `match-source` value resolves to `luminance`.

```css live-sample___luminance1
.applied-mask {
  mask-mode: luminance;
}
```

> Using the same mask as in the previous example, you'll note the areas where the mask is **lightest** the element is more opaque. The area where the mask is **darker** is less opaque.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When applying `mask-mode: luminance` to the same mask as in the previous example, the areas of the element where the mask is **lightest** are more opaque, while **darker** areas are less opaque.
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("luminance1", "", "250px")}}

> The opacity of a luminance mask is determined by the `R`, `G`, `B`, and `A` values of an {{glossary("RGB")}} color using the formula:

Reviewer: What happens when the color space used is different? Is it always converted to RGBA first before calculating?

Author: "Regardless of the method used, the procedure for calculating mask values assumes the content of the mask is a four-channel RGBA graphics object. " per the spec

    fill="rgb(255 0 0 / 0.5)"
    stroke="rgb(255 255 255 / 1)"
    stroke-width="20" />
</svg>
<img
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag"
  class="applied-clip" />
```

```css live-sample___svg1
.applied-mask {
  mask-image: url(#mask-heart);
}
.applied-clip {
  clip-path: url(#clip-heart);
}
```

```css hidden live-sample___svg1
:has(:checked) .applied-mask {
  mask-mode: alpha;
}
body {
  flex-flow: row wrap;
}
```

```html hidden live-sample___svg1
<label><input type="checkbox" /><code>mask-mode: alpha;</code></label>
```

Because the image source is a `<mask>`, and the mask has neither the `mask-type` CSS property nor the `mask-type` SVG attribute set, the `mask-type` defaults to `alpha` so the default of `mask-mode: match-source` resolves to `luminiance`. This is because, for mask sources that are SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements the `mask-type` defaults to `luminance`. In the case of `<mask>`, the `mask-type` defaults to either the value defaults to `luminance` unless the {{svgattr("mask-type")}} attribute is explicitly set to `alpha`.

> {{EmbedLiveSample("svg1", "", "290px")}}

Reviewer: This is still not resolved.

> {{EmbedLiveSample("svg1", "", "290px")}}

Author: it's set to wrap if the users screen isn't at the largest break point

---

> title: Introduction to masking

Author: ```suggestion
title: Introduction to CSS masking
```

    #f00 0 20px,
    #f005 20px 40px,
    transparent 40px 60px
  );
}
```

Note how the fully opaque mask areas reveal fully opaque element pixels, semi-transparent mask areas create semi-transparent areas, and fully transparent mask areas hide the associated areas completely.

{{EmbedLiveSample("gradient2", "", "250px")}}

The previous two examples used gradients as masks and background images. The mask image doesn't have to be a CSS image. It can be an external image or an SVG.

In this case we use an external PNG. The image contains a colorful heart with a transparent background.

```css live-sample___image1 live-sample___luminance1
.applied-mask {
  mask-image: url(https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/colorful-heart.png);
  mask-size: 220px 220px;
}
.mask-source {
  background: url(https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/colorful-heart.png);
  background-size: 220px 220px;
}
```

Note how the transparent mask areas crop the element; the only parts of the element that are visible are the areas where the mask is opaque. The color of the mask itself doesn't matter.

{{EmbedLiveSample("image1", "", "250px")}}

## Alpha transparency versus luminance

> We can force the colors of the mask to matter with the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property. Here we change the `mask-mode` to from the default of `match-source`, which sets the `mask-mode` either `alpha` or `luminance` depending on the mask type, and, in the case of SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements, `<mask>` element's actual {{cssxref("mask-type")}}. The mask mode defaults to `alpha` for all masks unless the mask source is an SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} element, in which case the `mask-type`, unless explicitly set with the CSS {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property or the SVG {{svgattr("mask-type")}} attribute, defaults to `luminance`, so the `match-source` value resolves to `luminance`.

Author: ```suggestion
The `mask-mode`'s default value sets the mode to either `alpha` or `luminance`, depending on the value, with the default `match-source` resolving to `alpha` for all mask sources other than for SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements. If the mask source is a `<mask>`, `match-source` resolves the `<mask>`'s {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property value, if set. Otherwise, it resolves to the value of the SVG {{svgattr("mask-type")}}  attribute set on the `<mask>` element. If that is not explicitly set either, setting `mask-mode: match-source` will resolve to `luminance.` 

We can force the colors of the mask to matter with the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property by setting the mask to be a `luminance` mask. In the previous demo, the `mask-mode` was not set, so the value defaulted to `match-source`. As the colorful heart image is a transparent PNG, the `mask-mode` resolved to `alpha`. By explicitly setting this property, we can control the mode. In this demo, we change the `mask-mode` from the default value of `match-source` to `luminance`.

```

      stroke-width="20" />
  </clippath>
  <path
    d="M20,70 A40,40,0,0,1,100,70 A40,40,0,0,1,180,70 Q180,130,100,190 Q20,130,20,70 Z"
    fill="rgb(255 0 0 / 0.5)"
    stroke="rgb(255 255 255 / 1)"
    stroke-width="20" />
</svg>
<img
  src="https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/progress-pride-flag.jpg"
  alt="Pride flag"
  class="applied-clip" />
```

```css live-sample___svg1
.applied-mask {
  mask-image: url(#mask-heart);
}
.applied-clip {
  clip-path: url(#clip-heart);
}
```

```css hidden live-sample___svg1
:has(:checked) .applied-mask {
  mask-mode: alpha;
}
body {
  flex-flow: row wrap;
}
```

```html hidden live-sample___svg1
<label><input type="checkbox" /><code>mask-mode: alpha;</code></label>
```

Because the image source is a `<mask>`, and the mask has neither the `mask-type` CSS property nor the `mask-type` SVG attribute set, the `mask-type` defaults to `alpha`, so the default of `mask-mode: match-source` resolves to `luminance`. This is because, for mask sources that are SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements, the `mask-type` defaults to `luminance` unless the {{svgattr("mask-type")}} attribute is explicitly set to `alpha`.

> {{EmbedLiveSample("svg1", "", "290px")}}

Author: ```suggestion
{{EmbedLiveSample("svg1", "", "300px")}}
```

---
title: Introduction to CSS masking

> slug: Web/CSS/CSS_masking/masking

Author: ```suggestion
slug: Web/CSS/CSS_masking/Masking
```

page-type: guide
---

{{CSSRef}}

> CSS masking enables you to reveal or hide parts of an element selectively by applying one or more mask images to it. These mask images can be gradients, images, or SVG sources. Unlike [CSS clipping](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_masking/CSS_clipping), which either fully shows or hides areas of an element based on the shape of a single path, masking allows for nuanced transparency and blending effects based on the alpha transparency and, optionally, luminance of the mask images.

Author: ```suggestion
CSS masking enables you to reveal or hide parts of an element selectively by applying one or more mask images to it. These mask images can be gradients, images, or SVG sources. Unlike [CSS clipping](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_masking/Clipping), which either fully shows or hides areas of an element based on the shape of a single path, masking allows for nuanced transparency and blending effects based on the alpha transparency and, optionally, luminance of the mask images.
```

    #f00 0 20px,
    #f005 20px 40px,
    transparent 40px 60px
  );
}
```

Note how the fully opaque mask areas reveal fully opaque element pixels, semi-transparent mask areas create semi-transparent areas, and fully transparent mask areas hide the associated areas completely.

{{EmbedLiveSample("gradient2", "", "250px")}}

The previous two examples used gradients as masks and background images. The mask image doesn't have to be a CSS image. It can be an external image or an SVG.

In this case we use an external PNG. The image contains a colorful heart with a transparent background.

```css live-sample___image1 live-sample___luminance1
.applied-mask {
  mask-image: url(https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/colorful-heart.png);
  mask-size: 220px 220px;
}
.mask-source {
  background: url(https://mdn.github.io/shared-assets/images/examples/colorful-heart.png);
  background-size: 220px 220px;
}
```

Note how the transparent mask areas crop the element; the only parts of the element that are visible are the areas where the mask is opaque. The color of the mask itself doesn't matter.

{{EmbedLiveSample("image1", "", "250px")}}

## Alpha transparency versus luminance

> The `mask-mode`'s default value sets the mode to either `alpha` or `luminance`, depending on the value, with the default `match-source` resolving to `alpha` for all mask sources other than for SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements. If the mask source is a `<mask>`, `match-source` resolves the `<mask>`'s {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property value, if set. Otherwise, it resolves to the value of the SVG {{svgattr("mask-type")}} attribute set on the `<mask>` element. If that is not explicitly set either, setting `mask-mode: match-source` will resolve to `luminance.`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `mask-mode` property's default value — `match-source` — sets the mode to either `alpha` or `luminance`, depending on the value. The `match-source` value resolves to `alpha` for all mask sources other than SVG {{svgelement("mask")}} elements. If the mask source is a `<mask>` element, `match-source` resolves to the `<mask>`'s {{cssxref("mask-type")}} property value, if set. Otherwise, it resolves to the value of the SVG {{svgattr("mask-type")}} attribute set on the `<mask>` element. If that is not explicitly set either, `match-source` will resolve to `luminance.`
```

> We can force the colors of the mask to matter with the {{cssxref("mask-mode")}} property by setting the mask to be a `luminance` mask. In the previous demo, the `mask-mode` was not set, so the value defaulted to `match-source`. As the colorful heart image is a transparent PNG, the `mask-mode` resolved to `alpha`. By explicitly setting this property, we can control the mode. In this demo, we change the `mask-mode` from the default value of `match-source` to `luminance`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `mask-mode` resolves to `luminance`, or we explicitly set it to `luminance`, the colors of the mask will affect the mask opacity. In the previous demo, the `mask-mode` was not set, so the value defaulted to `match-source`. As the colorful heart image is a transparent PNG, `match-source` resolves to `alpha`. By explicitly setting this property, we can control the mode. In this demo, we change the `mask-mode` to `luminance`.
```

{{EmbedLiveSample("svg1", "", "300px")}}

As we haven't set the `mask-type` attribute or CSS property on our mask, the `mask-mode` property default of `match-source` resolves to `luminance`. Toggle the checkbox to set the `mask-mode` value to `alpha` or allow it to default to `match-source`.

This example also demonstrated the difference between masking and clipping in CSS. You'll note that luminance and alpha-transparency are relevant to masking but not to clipping. Masking can be used to control the opacity of an element, while clipping shows everything inside the clipping path and fully hides the parts of the element outside the clip path. Clipped areas are completely invisible, whereas masked areas can be partially or fully visible.

If all you need are shapes, clipping may suffice. But if you need fading, variable opacity, or even control of position and size (which we'll discuss in a separate guide), masking is more suitable.

## See also

> - [Introduction to CSS clipping](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_masking/clipping)

Author: ```suggestion
- [Introduction to CSS clipping](/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_masking/Clipping)
```
